Societal Rift?

As more funding is poured into VR and headsets begin to ship to homes, is it time to consider the potential dangers of this immersive technology?

The metronomic crunch of snow underfoot ceases as I finally reach the summit. Gazing out over a magnificent alpine scene, I feel the hairs at the nape of my neck stand to attention as I survey the vast, icy expanses that are painted across the forbidding peaks, marking the meeting of earth and sky. Far below these distant leviathans a waterfall silently cascades down into a verdant valley, whose smooth undulations are pockmarked by specks of brown. Zooming in, they reveal themselves to be the dwellings of a small town. Returning to normal vision, I leap from my station and swoop down into the valley, guiding my flight through a series of floating rings which will ensure I have enough cash to enjoy myself once I reach my destination. The smell of wood smoke fills my nostrils as I soar over the cottages below, and a loud beeping interrupts me as I realise that back in my flat, my ready meal is burning.

For anyone who has marvelled at the immersion of a well-designed game world, the possibilities of Virtual Reality can't fail to excite. After the clunky, migraine-inducing polygons of Nintendo's hugely unsuccessful Virtual Boy in 1995, VR sat quietly in the corner of the home entertainment stable, painfully aware of its own limitations. However, twenty years later, we are now at a point where VR has rebuilt its shattered confidence and is ready to again stake a claim for a place in our living rooms. Spearheaded by the Oculus Rift (recently bought by Facebook for &#36;2bn), this latest generation appears to be able to begin to deliver on the enticing possibilities of VR. It remains obvious, however, that VR is still a long way from creating experiences that rival those we can enjoy in real life, or that described in the introduction to this article. Despite this, it would be dangerous not to consider the ethical and societal implications of VR delivering the product its name promises, as they could be far more profound than a singed chicken korma.

For many, taking mind-altering substances provides a degree of escapist fun. For some, the desire to enhance, subvert or simply forget reality grows too strong and a destructive path is taken. Often, the physical and mental damage caused by this path, coupled with increasing tolerance, can cause users to grow to hate the drug while still remaining addicted. In 'Brave New World', Huxley describes a drug which is largely consequence free. Could genuine VR be a soma for our near-future? Used ubiquitously in Huxley's dystopia, soma is described as so pleasurable as to make the reader question why people would ever cease taking 'two grammes for a trip to the gorgeous East, three for a dark eternity on the Moon'. The state consider it to be an excellent tool for suppressing dissent - soma is described as having 'all the advantages of Christianity and alcohol, with none of their defects'. Huxley addresses this point by suggesting throughout the novel that there is an inherent value in confronting reality, however unpleasant it is. Two potential issues of VR are raised by this comparison. Does a perfect, open-source (and consequently infinitely personalised) VR risk being so enjoyable, so perfectly crafted to release dopamine, that users will simply give up on seeking to improve and engage with their own reality? And secondly (for which it is worth remembering that Facebook, whose business model depends entirely on the collection and sharing of personal data, have shown a keen interest in the progression of VR), could VR be exploited as a means of controlling the masses? How much effort would be put into ensuring our society is a meritocratic, broadly egalitarian one if most of its participants could be happily left in decaying bedsits, plugged in to VR?

In posing the previous two questions, a third arises. If VR reached a point where it could effectively recreate any reality desired (and supposedly improve upon it) would anyone - be they dockyard worker, government official or the CEO of a VR company - prefer to persevere with the 'real' reality rather than simply 'get by' in preparation for an evening of tailored fantasies of your choosing? Could generations of VR erode our collective sense of what constitutes reality, and a more nuanced view appear? I do not expect anyone to have the answers to these questions yet, much as the ethical issues regarding companies harvesting data from connected devices may have been hard to predict in 1991. In thirty years, it is very possible that these questions will turn out to have totally missed the mark and appear to be luddite scaremongering. However, for such a potentially society-altering development, it is important we stay awake to the dangers. I hope that as Virtual Reality grows and improves we as citizens are vigilant regarding how it is regulated, and ensure we don't sleepwalk into a holiday for a dark eternity on the Moon.

DISCUSSION POINTS
How likely is it that VR can create worlds immersive enough to present a genuinely attractive alternative to the real world, and what time frame are we looking at for achieving this?

What are the dangers to society of VR becoming 'too immersive'?

How should we regulate a hypothetical VR industry where users can experience the kind of VR described in the previous point?

SELECT DISTINCT headline, content, datePosted, category, image, rating, name, email, username, profilepic, link, discussion_point, tag_idtag FROM article LEFT JOIN user on article.user_userid = user.userid LEFT JOIN sources on article.idarticle = sources.article_idarticle LEFT JOIN discussion_points on article.idarticle = discussion_points.article_idarticle LEFT JOIN tag_article_match on article.idarticle = tag_article_match.article_idarticle WHERE idarticle = 1